2. Human Geography

(i) Social/ Cultural Geography encom-
passes the study of society and its
spatial dynamics as well as the cultural
elements contributed by the society.

(ii) Population and Settlement Geography
(Rural and Urban). It studies population
growth, distribution, density, sex ratio,
migration and occupational structure
etc. Settlement geography studies the
characteristics of rural and urban
settlements.

(iii) Economic Geography studies economic
activities of the people including
agriculture, industry, tourism, trade,
and transport, infrastructure and
services, etc.

(iv) Historical Geography studies the
historical processes through which the
space gets organised. Every region has
undergone some historical experiences
before attaining the present day status.
The geographical features also
experience temporal changes and these
form the concerns of historical
geography.
