The Rhine Waterways

The Rhine ﬂows through Germany and the
Netherlands. It is navigable for 700 km from
Rotterdam, at its mouth in the Netherlands to
Basel in Switzerland. Ocean-going vessels can
reach up to Cologne. The Ruhr river joins the
Rhine from the east. It ﬂows through a rich
coalfield and the whole basin has become a
prosperous manufacturing area. Dusseldorf is
the Rhine port for this region. Huge tonnage
moves along the stretch south of the Ruhr. This
waterway is the world’s most heavily used. Each
year more than 20,000 ocean-going ships and
2,00,000 inland vessels exchange their cargoes.
It connects the industrial areas of Switzerland,
Germany, France, Belgium and the Netherlands
with the North Atlantic Sea Route.

This important inland waterway serves Eastern
Europe. The Danube river rises in the Black
Forest and ﬂows eastwards through many
countries. It is navigable up to Taurna Severin.
The chief export items are wheat, maize, timber,
and machinery.
