3.4 INSTANTANEOUS VELOCITY AND SPEED

The average velocity tells us how fast an object
has been moving over a given time interval but
does not tell us how fast it moves at different
instants of time during that interval. For this,
we define instantaneous velocity or simply
velocity v at an instant t.

The velocity at an instant is defined as the
limit of the average velocity as the time interval
Atbecomes infinitesimally small. In other words,
where the symbol A1110 stands for the operation

of taking limit as Atâ€”>O of the quantity on its
right. In the language of calculus, the quantity
on the right hand side of Eq. (3.3a) is the
differential coefficient of xwith respect to tand
dx is denoted by E (see Appendix 3.1). It is the
rate of change of position with respect to time,
at that instant.

We can use Eq. (3.3a) for obtaining the value
of velocity at an instant either graphically or
numerically. Suppose that we want to obtain
graphically the value of velocity at time t = 4 s
(point P) for the motion of the car represented
in Fig. 3.3. The figure has been redrawn in
Fig. 3.6 choosing different scales to facilitate the
